---
layout: post
title: Reality, It So Happens, Is Real
categories: essays
comments: true
---

Twenty years ago today, January 17, '94, at 4:31 a.m., I was awakened not by
the seismic waves springing out of the north-central Valley, but by my
girlfriend, who was shouting at me to get out of bed, having herself sprung to
the door where I could see her pressing on the frame with both palms outward in
a near-gesture of benediction. I think at the time she would have called
herself skeptical of the notion of Providence, but there's nothing like the
threat of imminent danger to turn us into Pascal's suckers. She was smarter
than I was. The Northridge quake took a toll.

Her active concern extended a critical opportunity. I could hear E.J., our
roommate and the bass player in our band, shuffling around the living room and
talking to Andrea about the media ephemera knocked off the shelves and which
were carpeting the floor. I knew from the their conversation that there would
be some tedious picking up to do. I might avoid it entirely, though, if I could
make Andrea feel ridiculous about her dread. I might cut an easy path through
the inconvenience of the mess, which, as it turned out, was considerable.

A man. A plan. A canal.

A display of indifferent nonchalance would yield the additional benefit of
becoming a demonstration of late-20th-century, alpha-male certitude, as though
Nature's worst were merely an exasperating inconvenience to be endured by me,
He-Who-Could-Not-Be-Bothered. What had I not seen before? Be dashed, World of
Mysteries.

So I painted it pretty thick, annoyed with her for getting me up -- plainly
this earthquake was due to some failing on her part. She saw through the ploy,
I'm pretty sure, but this didn't matter, my case was unassailable.  I'd've
slept through throught it all had it not been for her. She'd have to take my
mild abuse for the short term and even work a little to bring me into a better
humor. The healthy bond between us.

In my defense, I've never been a morning person.

Our neighbors were up and more than a few West L.A. residents were milling about
on Bundy Drive, by day a busy thoroughfare perhaps best known as the street
where Nicole Brown and Ron Goldman would be found murdered on June 13 of that
year, a crime for which O.J. Simpson would turn himself in exactly five months
to the day after the quake.

We were a few blocks south of O.J., so our paths, alas, never crossed the
morning of the earthquake (nor ever). We did run into just about everyone else
on our own block, people who had managed to remain mostly invisible to each
other until then. The black, early hour was chilly, as I recall, and many
residents were wearing robes or other sleepwear, a sartorial situation which was
in its own way a little unsettling. Emergency intimacy. Ho-hum, but noticeable.
E.J. and I explored the extraordinarily limited novelty of loitering on Bundy in
the dark with a small herd of drowsy Westies. The managers wanted us out of the
building so that they could make sure, I suppose, that it wouldn't come crashing
down. Andrea was talking to complete strangers about tectonic horrors sundry
and various, but I was sleepy and cold, so I flouted the protective ill-logic
of freezing in the open and I sneaked into the underground garage and hid in a
car. I zoned out for a few minutes before Andrea was knocking on the window,
reporting that we could go back in.

The quake was a harbinger. Later that year, a T.V. anchor would say of O.J.'s
White Bronco flight, "This is one of those cases where you just can't believe
that reality is real" [(Lee)](#Lee). Had I been more present in the moment of
that morning on January 17, I would have been inclined to project the
circumstances of natural upheaval as a sign of things to come.  That tendency
is certainly in keeping with my usual take on the universe, and I would
absolutely feel that inclination more than once during that year, as I broke up
with Andrea by pursuing another relationship, watched a four-year project
dissolve, struggled to find a new way to define my future, and felt repeatedly
the stings of loss and the urgency of new possibilities. There would be no easy
paths cut through the subsequent temblors of my own making.

Had I been more awake to the implications of the earthquake, I might, too, have
been a little easier to be around that morning. I could have recognized that
somewhere in my city, some people were really suffering. Looking back it seems
that I had an investment in not always believing that reality was real, and
it's taken some considerable part of the last twenty years to get to a place
where that investment has dwindled, thankfully so. Turns out, earthquakes,
God's or otherwise, bring things down, and some of those things stay lost. I
don't regret all of those losses, but I do at times regret not knowing when I
was losing.

<a name="Lee"></a>
1. Lee, Ryan M. June 17, 1994. Dir. Brett Morgen. ESPN. 16 June 2010.
   Television.  Quick-cut footage of the events of June 17, 1994, especially
   the O.J. Simpson chase.
